[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hello, my beautiful
co-creators.
Lilou here for Gaiam TV.
I'm in Holland today,
in Doorn, with John.
How are you?
Great, Lilou.
Good to be here with you.
Thank you for accepting
to do this interview.
I'm really, really
thrilled you're here
at a conference on non-duality.
And you have an
impressive resume.
I love interviewing
people like you.
It's not the resume, but
it's just your achievements
and your willingness to expose
with science together, hand
in hand, how awesome
beings we are.
So thank you so much for all
your work throughout the world.
It's my pleasure.
Thank you.
Great to be with you today.
So you're a quantum
physician, particle physician?
Yes, or today we say
"unified field theorist,"
or "superstring theorist,"
which is that branch of physics,
cutting edge physics, that
explores the deepest truth
and the fundamental
unity of life,
the deep unity that
underlies and gives
rise to the surface of
diversity of the universe,
the core unity in
you, at the core of me
and of everyone and everything.
That's the unified field.
You studied very-- you
had very academical studies
when you went through Harvard.
And you were a researcher
at the CERN, right?
Correct, yes, and Stanford
University faculty.
Again, the focus as
a superstring theory
was not just on elementary
particle physics, which
is part of it, but
it's going deep into it
to discover that all
the forces of nature,
all the particles of nature,
are one at their source,
discovering one universal
field of intelligence
at the basis of you and
me and the whole universe.
Well, it's quite
special, I feel,
because really
earlier on you were
interested about the
transcendental meditation
and what the Vedics are teaching
and what the Vedics were
teaching years ago, and
what you have come across
and the theories and the
research that you have done
brings it all
together, doesn't it?
That is what is so
exciting about our time.
And that is after some decades
of vague correspondence
between modern science and the
ancient wisdom, from the Vedas,
for example, that correspondence
is no longer vague.
That unity of modern science and
ancient wisdom is now complete.
Science has matured
to the point where
it has transcended diversity and
discovered the non-dual source.
This is really fulfilling
Einstein's lifelong dream,
which was to discover
the unified source
of the diversified
universe, fundamental unity
at the basis of the surface
diversity of the universe.
And once modern science
stepped onto unity--
and that is the thrust
of science today;
it's all about the
unified field--
then we have, in a
sense, been able to shake
hands with the
ancient Vedic wisdom,
the ancient major truth
traditions of the world
and spiritual
to jointly confirm the
fundamental unity of life.
Is that truly happening?
Because from my understanding
and some interviews that I have
done, I do not really
see current science,
the materialistic science,
coming to any sort
of agreement whatsoever.
They seem more
rebellious than ever.
Well, you know,
science is a huge field.
And there's physics, and there's
biology, and there's botany,
and there's chemistry
and astronomy.
But the most advanced
in fundamental
of those disciplines is
physics, and the most advanced,
cutting edge area of
physics is superstring
theory and M theory.
And there, among the
leaders in that world
of the string theorists and
unified field theorists,
there is consensus.
It's not that unified field
theory or superstring theory
won't continue to evolve
a bit and refine a bit
and mature a bit.
That's true.
But even now, the cornerstones
of the theory are in place,
and the fundamental unity of
life has been established.
There's really no
choice in physics.
Tell more about this bridge
of where we're at with science,
because most of us are used
to and have been taught
at school regular science.
Tell us what is the evolution.
How can we move from regular
science to this unified theory.
It's an interesting question,
because really for quite
a long time, classical
physics has given
rise to quantum mechanics.
And quantum mechanics
has been well
established now for 90 years.
And it makes spectacularly
accurate predictions.
And we use it to create
transistors and computers
and so many technologies.
And yet if you ask the
person in the street, even
the average scientist
or medical doctor,
they don't know quantum
mechanics at all.
And it takes time for these
deep discoveries to percolate,
to trickle through
society, even to make
their way into education.
So the people who are teaching
science in the schools today
are still teaching
classical science 90 years
after classical
science has changed,
given way to quantum mechanics.
And now quantum mechanics
in the last 25 years
has given way, after Nobel
Prize after Nobel Prize,
to the discovery of unity.
It was 1970s that a
Nobel Prize was given
for discovering that two of
the four forces of nature
were actually one.
And so that principle of
unification is established.
But has it reached the
whole scientific community?
Has it reached the
entire society?
No.
But we don't worry too much
about the whole society,
because, you know,
opinions are opinions.
You really want to know what's
going on at the forefront
of science, and the
forefront of science
is about the unified field.
Tell us more about
the unified field.
This unified field,
or superstring field,
is a field of universal
intelligence, a field
of abstract, pure existence.
And this ocean of pure existence
rises in waves of vibration.
And the waves of vibration
of the unified field
appear as the different
particles of nature,
the different forces of nature.
The so-called building
blocks of creation
are just the vibrational
tones or weeks of this ocean
of pure existence.
And of course, once
you create those waves,
so-called particles,
you can assemble them
into protons and
atoms and molecules
and objects and people
and planets and galaxies.
So it all starts from the field.
And it's a lively,
it's a dynamic silence.
It's a dynamic field.
And then dynamism
of the field is
responsible for the field
flowing as vibration, vibrating
as frequencies or sound.
And the different sounds
of the unified field
are the elementary
particles and forces.
So we're not living in
a material universe.
This is for sure.
We are living,
really, in a symphony.
All these different
tones or frequencies
of this universal
field, or unified field,
comprise the universe.
So you were made of
the unified field.
You are the unified
field in vibration.
I am the superstring
And planets and particles
and molecules-- everything
is just that one ocean
of pure existence,
pure intelligence in vibration.
And that is the unity at the
basis of the surface diversity
that is you and that is me.
And from this perspective,
and we'll talk about it,
meditation,
classically understood,
classically practiced,
is a technique
to take our outwardly directed
attention, through the senses,
powerfully within, to explore,
to experience deeper levels
of mind, quieter
levels of intelligence,
quieter levels of thought,
and then slip beyond thought
completely to experience
what is called
pure being, pure consciousness.
And in that maximally expanded
state of consciousness, also
called samadhi,
individual mind expands
to become universal mind.
That means individual
awareness directly experiences
the unified field, which
is the origin of thought
and the origin of matter.
So that's what meditation
is, although meditation
today can mean a million
different things.
I really mean transcending,
transcending meditation leading
to samadhi, pure
consciousness, the experience
of the unified field.
So it's not just
abstract theory.
And it's not just
formulas on a paper.
Unified field is absolutely
central to you, central to me.
It is the core of life itself.
It is our own self,
our own subjectivity.
It is the knower within
us, the seer within us.
Fundamentally, that knower,
that seer, that consciousness
inside us is universal.
And if we know that
consciousness clearly
and experience it frequently
so that you know it intimately,
you know the self as unbounded,
universal, eternal, immortal,
bliss.
Is this what you call
the Maharishi effect?
The Maharishi Effect, which is
a concept that was discovered--
it was proposed and then
scientifically discovered
by Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi, who revived yoga
and revived, really,
transcendental meditation,
or transcending meditation,
in India and then here
in the West, 50, 60 years ago.
The Maharishi Effect
is slightly different.
Maharishi Effect is
the calming effect,
or peace-promoting effect,
of meditation in groups.
And that's another interesting
area we can talk about.
You could actually
use group meditation
to reduce social stress
and to calm social violence
and to promote peace.
So when enough people
get together and they--
How much is enough?
It depends on the size of
the population you're hoping
to calm down, but
typically the square root
of 1% of a population,
which for the United States,
my home country, would be
about 2,000 people in a group.
For the whole world, if you
could create such a big group,
it would be about 9,000.
And we're working on that today.
We are establishing a group.
We have a group in the United
States now of almost 2,000.
We're creating one super group
for the world in India, where
it's very
cost-effective to do it,
of about 9,000 advanced
meditating experts
who, in a group,
according to research--
and there's lots and lots of
very good published research--
would produce a
harmonizing effect,
a peace-promoting
effect big enough
to improve trends and reduce
violence throughout the world.
And that's what's called
the Maharishi Effect.
How do you measure all of this?
Can you tell us some of the--
maybe not the equations,
because I do not think
our mind can match
with your brilliant mind in that
way, but can you explain to us?
Well, of course, one of the
new trends in meditation--
and that was also started
by Maharishi 50 years ago,
is to do research, scientific,
publishable research,
on the effects of meditation,
firstly on health,
secondly on brain development.
And already that's
really important.
And I'm very lucky,
very honored,
to be associated with
something called the David
Lynch Foundation for
Consciousness-Based
Education and World Peace.
In the purpose of
this foundation
is to bring meditation to
every student in the world.
And right now in
the United States,
there are about a
million children,
especially at-risk
children in public schools,
where those schools have adopted
transcendental meditation
in the classroom to
develop the brains,
improve the health and behavior
of these million children.
And it is beginning to
transform education.
The results of this are
absolutely astonishing.
Can you measure it?
Yes.
You can measure it in terms
of increased IQ, creativity,
learning ability, academic
performance, graduation rates,
reducing suspension
rates, improving behavior.
So all of these things are
very important to a school.
Academic performance and grades
are very important to a school.
The development of the
brain is very important,
not just for students,
really, but for everybody.
So that can be accomplished
through meditation
easily, automatically.
So that's one of the
things you can measure.
The other thing, of
course, the government
is very interested in?
Heart disease and health.
One of the most
interesting studies,
probably the most important
study in the whole world
of complementary medicine
and alternative medicine,
is the recent nine-year study,
released by the US National
Institutes of Health, on
transcendental meditation
and heart disease
and stroke and death,
finding that you can reduce
heart attack and stroke
and death by all causes by
2/3 in a group that has,
in addition to their
normal medications
and normal diet and
normal exercise, also
practices meditation.
2/3 is a major reduction.
So yes, in terms of the effects
on the body, the very deep
rest, the reduction of
stress, the elimination
of stress-related illness,
in terms of the development
of the brain and mind and
creativity and intelligence,
all of that can be measured.
And finally, you can also
measure the effects on society
from large groups of meditators.
And there, you simply measure
crime rate, social violence,
terrorism, war.
And if you can create a large
group, which isn't always
easy to do, in the
vicinity of conflict,
like in the Middle East during
the peak of the Lebanon war,
if you can produce a group
that's large enough, maybe
in that case 800 or
1,000 or 1,200 people,
you can turn off war
like a light switch.
You can create a
calming influence
and reduce the acute stress,
the religious tensions
and political tensions and
the ethnic tensions that fuel
violence and fuel
conflict and see it
in terms of reduced war
deaths, war injuries,
and progress towards peace.
So everything is
measurable today.
And anything, honestly--
this is my bias
as a scientist--
anything that is
really true or worth anything
produces testable results.
And this whole tradition
of testing meditation
for its benefits
is relatively new,
but it's a very
important contribution
of this scientific age,
which makes meditating today
different from 2,000 years ago.
Because today, you can test
the effects of meditation
and see what meditations are
working, what meditations
maybe aren't working so much.
And that's important
to me, very important.
What I'm really impressed
by is that it boots,
it gives a big boost, because
when you think of 2,000 people
that could impact
that big a population,
it seems like it's super sized.
I mean, it has an extra power.
I mean, it's a very
small group in the end
compared to the population.
So how powerful is it?
I mean, that means
that the power of unity
is times-- I don't know.
You tell me.
It's a big factor.
You're absolutely right.
This is really an
intelligent point.
You might wonder, well,
how can a group that
is so relatively small--
how could 2,000 people
affect a million people?
And the reason is that thought
can be enormously powerful.
Thought can also be
exceedingly weak.
And destructive.
It can be destructive also.
So how do you create
powerful thought?
Powerful thought simply means
deeper levels of thought,
deeper levels of mind,
more fundamental levels
of human intelligence.
Remember, during the
meditation technique,
the awareness, which is
normally outward and active and
turbulent and a bit
chaotic, honestly,
if you look at the electrical
activity of the brain.
The brain's not really
talking to itself.
It's scattered.
It's fragmented.
But in the inward flow of the
awareness during the meditation
process, the whole brain
comes into a profound state
of synchrony.
It's quite extraordinary to
see, unlike anything, not
like hypnosis, not like
sleep, not like dreaming,
not like waking.
The whole brain
functions in concert,
in a unified, powerful way.
And at those deeper levels of
mind where the brain is unified
and functioning
coherently, then thought
becomes enormously powerful.
And you know, it's the
same principle in nature.
This is a physics principles.
It's called the uncertainty
principle of quantum mechanics,
which basically says
the deeper you go,
the more powerful
nature becomes.
If you've ever wondered
why nuclear power is
a million times more powerful
than chemical energy,
they're really very similar.
In chemical energy,
you're rearranging
atoms into different molecules.
In nuclear power,
you rearranging
nucleons, protons and neutrons,
into different nuclei.
It's the same thing,
but a million times
smaller and, therefore, a
million times more powerful.
So the deeper you go,
the more powerful,
the more energetic nature
becomes, the more powerful
thoughts become.
So at these deepest
levels of mind
experienced during meditation
and going beyond mind
completely to experience
our own core being,
these are the powerful
levels of thought.
And with this, with a
mustard seed of faith,
the scriptures say,
you can move mountains.
And all the great
traditions understand
the power of intention.
At the same time, it
can be exceedingly weak.
It just depends upon the level
at which we're thinking--
surface, chaotic, fractured
mind; deeper, more unified,
coherent mind.
So if a nuclear power is a
million times more powerful
than chemical energy, and if
the unified field, the level
of pure consciousness within us,
is 10 million million million
times more powerful even
than the nuclear force,
you can imagine how powerful
thoughts can become.
So you must be quite
optimistic about the future and
the evolution of human beings.
A lot of people talk
of 2012, of course,
and I'm sure many people
ask you that question.
But how do you feel?
Where do you feel human beings
are and how they're evolving?
I am very optimistic.
I did not used to be
terribly optimistic.
But understanding now
and scientifically
confirming the power
of human consciousness
and how easy it is to
culture that power-- even
at-risk children
from the age of 10
can experience clear,
transcending, universal
consciousness in minutes.
Or warriors coming back from the
battlefield with Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder,
their lives ruined,
their brains in a state
of permanent imbalance,
and in 20 minutes,
even, that deep stress
can be completely unwound
through the deep, deep rest
and inner silence
of transcending,
pure consciousness, samadhi.
Seeing the transformation that
is possible in the functioning
of the brains of
anyone and everyone
and seeing education,
public education,
starting to absorb, to
adopt transcending as part
of the academic structure, it's
only a matter of time, and not
too many years, before
our educational systems
are starting to unfold the
full potential of the brain
and of life.
And when that happens,
when people start
using 100% of the potential
of life, of the brain,
and not 5% or 10%, we
will see a completely
transformed world,
easily in our lifetime,
and hopefully quite soon.
Is this why you
went into politics?
I know you were three times
candidate, the Natural
Law Party up until 2000.
Is this part of your-- I mean,
you're doing so many things.
First of all, I don't
know how you do them all,
but you were even
involved in politics.
So what are some of the things
that you wanted to implement?
And what are some of the things
you think would really highly
contribute and some that
the president should
incorporate in their program?
It's a very good point, Lilou.
And I think you're right.
The purpose of getting
involved politically
or becoming a
political activist was,
of course, to promote change.
And in the United States,
we are locked into what is
called this two-party system.
And unfortunately,
the two parties are
so similar in some respects.
They're not really discussing
any fundamentally new approach.
And they're not talking
about the development
of the human being.
They're not talking about the
development of consciousness.
They're not even talking about
the prevention of disease
and the promotion of health.
They're only talking
about treating disease
through a medical system
that is very invasive, very
expensive, and often
too late, you know,
once the disease has begun.
So we started a
political party, which
grew to be quite significant.
And the idea was to promote
prevention-oriented solutions
and consciousness-based
solutions,
understanding that people
always act on the basis of who
they are, on the basis
of the development
of their consciousness.
And if you can promote the
development of consciousness,
unfold the full human being,
develop the total brain,
in the schools, for
example, you can
create an entirely different
society and an entirely
different world.
So the purpose of third
parties in the United States
is not actually to win,
although that would be nice.
Because you can't win, really.
The finances and the system is
stacked so heavily against you.
But the idea of third
parties where they do succeed
is in injecting new ideas into
the political dialogue, ideas
that if they're timely
will take root and start
to spread like a wildfire.
And we were able to really
disseminate some new ideas
and to create some
really important
new solutions which
have never been
discussed politically before.
So that's the reason for
a political agitation,
a political activism.
But ultimately,
the solutions have
to come from deeper than that.
Politics is a little bit
of a superficial approach.
You really need to introduce
change from within.
Change always begins within.
Yeah.
So it's more the 97% of the
population that doesn't have
the supposedly authority
that could make
a difference in this world?
-Exactly.
-Us.
Us, yes, the
grassroots, so to speak,
the average person,
really all of us,
have to be part of the solution.
You could even elect, in
principle, an enlightened
government, and the
government would
be somewhat limited in
what it can really do.
Because ultimately,
the government
can try to impose laws
and try to control
behavior from the outside in
through fear of punishment,
for example.
But you know, fear of
punishment doesn't really work.
I mean, the United States
has the toughest penal code
in the world, in a sense.
Capital punishment is used.
But it still has a very,
very high murder rate.
So the death penalty
doesn't even work.
Really, activity
comes from within.
And to change an individual
from within to take
the light of life, the
light of consciousness,
the amount of
awareness or conscious
that we have, and
turn it up and up
and up from inside like a
light bulb becoming brighter.
That will lead to
more enlightened, more
luminous thinking and behavior.
So we have to start
with education.
Education should-- it's supposed
to-- develop human potential.
And today it really doesn't.
It provides some information,
some useful facts,
some useful skills.
But unfortunately, in
terms of developing
the enormous potential
of life and of the brain,
education completely
fails to do that.
And that's why fundamental
education reform is necessary.
It doesn't mean new classrooms.
It doesn't mean computers.
It means powerful,
natural techniques
to develop the brain.
Even if those
techniques are ancient,
even if they may
come from the East,
that doesn't mean
they're religious.
Gravity was discovered
in England by Newton,
doesn't make gravity English.
Relativity was
discovered by a German.
Einstein doesn't make
relativity German.
Meditation was ultimately
derived and developed
in the ancient
Vedic culture, and
the whole system of
yoga, for example,
doesn't make it Indian.
It's universal knowledge,
and we all need to use it.
Obviously you love children,
and you're passionate about it,
and you see that they're a
big part of the solution.
How do we develop
as human beings?
How does our brain evolve?
And when are these
principles especially
important to teach to children?
And even what should parents
teach to their own children
and at what age?
Because it's very
earlier on, isn't it?
Before six years old,
or what are the--?
It's true, to some degree,
a lot of what we absorb
and what shapes us
is from our parents.
It's from a very early age.
I think really the best thing--
best thing-- a parent can do
is themselves to be happy
and balanced and evolving.
But by the age of 10, a
child can sit down and close
the eyes, surprising as it
may be, within a few minutes,
with proper guidance,
can experience
unbounded, universal, immortal
consciousness, just as you can,
just as I can.
It's that simple.
It's that natural.
And over the
centuries, meditation
has become misunderstood,
difficult, complicated,
something for the
recluse, something
you have to do for lifetimes.
It should not take lifetimes
to experience samadhi, not even
hours-- minutes.
And it's just a
question of technique.
And over the years, you can
trace it throughout history,
you can watch what happened
with the concepts of meditation,
became complicated
and misunderstood.
Transcending is natural.
We're hardwired for it.
The brain is as if specifically
designed by someone,
something, designed to
transcend, to experience
our universal nature.
Unfortunately, we don't
access that capability.
We've got the hardware.
We don't have the software.
We don't have the training.
So the training just involves
quiet, personal instruction.
And it only takes about an
hour or so for about four days
in a row to be sure one is
transcending effortlessly.
And then you've got it
for the rest of your life.
Because you started
really early.
How early?
17 years old, yeah.
I just happened to
come across-- well,
I was trying many things, I must
say, at that age, many things.
And I've since really
dappled and experimented
with many, many
things and gained
certain benefits from a
number of different things.
But what was really
life-changing for me,
and what is the most
fundamental experience,
really for anything, is going
beyond the whole mental circus,
going beyond thought
completely and experiencing
our core being.
That is called
samadhi, transcending.
And that is the essence of it.
That's where development
really starts.
That's where the rapid
unfoldment of the brain begins.
And that's the experience that
needs to be given to children.
It doesn't have to
have any belief.
It doesn't have
to have any dogma.
It doesn't matter.
It's not an intellectual thing.
It's not visualizing.
It's not contemplating.
It's not dispassionate
self-reflection.
All of that has to do with mind.
It's going, slipping
beyond mind to being.
In that space, when
you say transcendent,
does it transcend also
the limiting belief
and what we have in store
in the unconscious mind?
Absolutely transcends mind,
belief, sensation, feeling,
intellect, ego-- everything.
It's a radically
different experience--
radically different experience--
from anything we experience
in waking consciousness.
It's like day and night.
If you look at the brain,
the brain is normally
quite chaotic, and this part
of the brain is doing this,
this part is doing this.
There's not much integration,
coordination, communication.
In the state of unbounded
awareness, transcending,
the entire brain is
absolutely synchronous.
The awareness
expands to infinity,
immortality, beyond time.
It is unmistakable.
That experience is as simple,
as natural, and more important,
I think, than any
experience we normally have.
We're all designed to have it.
And the tragedy
of education today
is that it doesn't give it.
And that's why, with David
Lynch, the filmmaker,
founded the David
Lynch Foundation
to bring that experience
to everyone in the world.
And it's easy to do.
And also through
movies, I guess,
that you have put
together with him
to be able to see it and witness
it and even experience it
without having maybe the tools?
That's an interesting point.
There have been some
films about meditation,
films like "The Secret,"
films like "What the Bleep."
And, of course, I've
been in those films.
But David himself
hasn't really made films
about the transcendent,
interestingly, even though he
himself is a very deep,
regular meditator.
For him, his joy
of filmmaking is
different-- a little bizarre,
but also very fascinating.
He's a creative artist,
absolutely the real thing.
He's an incredible,
creative artist.
But his interest in
the transcendent,
he hasn't yet used film to
kind of expose or reveal that.
Maybe someday he will.
So his work with his foundation
is really to bring the funding
so that schools can actually
hire the type of education
of transcendental
meditation instructor
that can easily give that
experience to all the children.
And that's one of
the things I've been
very happy to be involved with.
Tell us on the neuroscience
level and the neuroplasticity,
how does that rewire
even our brains?
That is a really good question.
You know, experience, any
experience, changes the brain.
Our brains are amazingly
flexible and changeable,
incredibly plastic.
We're always forging
new connections,
creating new neural pathways.
And, of course,
any new experience,
any fundamental experience
like transcending,
is going to start
to rewire the brain.
Now, during transcending,
two things happen.
Firstly, the higher brain,
the prefrontal cortex,
the executive
center of the brain,
gets directly stimulated.
It lights up.
And that's important,
because the higher brain
is responsible for all of
our higher human functions,
moral reasoning,
judgment, planning,
decision making, all of that.
It sits over the primitive
brain and maintains control.
It's our rational filter
against primitive, impulsive,
aggressive, violent behavior.
But under stress, the
prefrontal cortex shuts down.
Under chronic stress, which
pervades the world today,
the higher brain shuts
down chronically and even
fails to develop properly.
So we end up in a world, living
in a world where so many people
are walking around with an
underdeveloped higher brain,
kind of an adolescent world.
And if you look
at the television
or what's going on
the news, you'll
agree that we're living very
much in an adolescent world
of aggression and impulsive
behavior, violence
and nationalism and
narrow-minded, self centered
shortsightedness and so on.
So we need to develop
the higher brain.
And, of course, transcending
lights up the higher brain.
But more importantly, it
integrates the higher brain
with the rest of the brain
so that the higher brain
can do its job, which is
to control the entire brain
so we're not driven by impulse.
We're not driven by
primitive impulses.
We're driven by our loftiest,
highest aspirations.
So, yes, it completely
rewires the brain,
not just during meditation,
which you see it so striking.
It's amazing to
see the difference
between the meditating
brain, the EEG
of the meditating brain, and
the EEG of the waking brain.
But over time, that
orderly brain functioning,
synchronous brain functioning,
coherent brain functioning,
becomes permanent.
And when it becomes permanent,
it is called enlightenment.
And enlightenment is
really, fundamentally just
as a definition, it's when
our unbounded, immortal, inner
self, when our own pure
consciousness becomes
permanently established so
that in dynamic activity, even
during deep sleep,
we are never lost
to the experience of our
unbounded, immortal, blissful
self.
It's permanent samadhi in the
midst of dynamic activity.
That's proper brain functioning.
That's how our brains
were designed to work.
But it just takes--
like speech is natural.
We're designed to talk.
But it takes a little
bit of instruction.
If a child is
abandoned in the woods
and is lucky enough to
survive as an infant,
they don't learn to speak.
So it's natural, but it takes
a little bit of training.
Transcending and the
development of enlightenment
is equally natural.
It's a built-in,
innate capability
of the human nervous system.
But it takes a few minutes
of training, that's all.
It feels that when
we're doing something
that we love in light--
in life-- in light,
in life, whether
it is gardening,
or like for me interviewing,
or for a writer to write,
there is this natural
connection that occurs.
And it nearly feels like
it's a meditative state,
and it's a blissful way.
To me, if more people
would do what they love,
then this Earth will be
a lot more harmonious.
Can you see that through
your own research
how important and essential
this is for our society
to be living on that level?
Well, it is important to be
living what one loves to do.
Unfortunately,
that's not a luxury
many people feel they have.
They have to work.
They have to grind
out their jobs.
They have to earn a living.
But it is much healthier,
much more evolutionary,
and brings more
happiness to be doing
what you like to be doing.
And for the fortunate few who
get to work professionally
doing what they
like to be doing,
like you with this type of
work, that's really fortunate.
So that's a very good thing.
And other key thing is, by
establishing inner bliss,
one brings more bliss to
whatever one does so that one
finds, I even like my job.
I even like teaching
university kids.
You just-- there's
more joy in everything.
It's unlimited, yeah.
There is even more and deeper.
Sometimes we get satisfied
with what we have, don't we?
Well, that's true.
We can become too content.
We can become too content,
and we don't always
seek that which is
even more blissful,
more joyful, more evolutionary.
It's true.
Usually in society we say,
oh, you're never satisfied.
You're always looking
for more and more.
But we can, can't we?
It seems like that we need
to be rewired and rethink
and live in a whole-- we can
live in a whole new world
right now.
We don't need to wait.
Well, you know,
it's interesting,
because this tendency
to want more and more
and seek more happiness, it's
actually a very good thing.
It is deep in the
nature of life to want
to grow and expand,
gain more knowledge,
more happiness, more power.
It's built into
the nature of life,
and it's good
because, it drives us
to seek more and more and more.
And the only lasting happiness--
because no matter what you get,
if you get a new
Cadillac, you soon
discover you want
a Mercedes, or you
soon discover you
want a Lamborghini,
and it never stops.
But infinity-- infinity-- if
it could be lived in life,
would be the natural
state of contentment.
If it were possible to
experience a joy beyond which
no further joy could
even be imagined,
that would be the
natural state of life.
Then contentment
would be permanent.
But you know, that's
what enlightenment is.
It's experiencing absolute,
infinite joy all the time.
That's the natural
state of life.
And it's that very drive
towards happiness which
makes meditation effortless,
because meditation, again,
properly understood
and practiced,
involves typically
what's called a sound,
or mantra with a-- it's a sound
with a very special property.
There are different
types of mantras,
but a transcending mantra, to
take you to the transcendent,
has a special property.
It is a sound that
is experienced
as more charming, more
enticing, more alluring, more
blissful at deeper and
deeper and deeper and deeper
levels of thought.
When the mind catches
a glimpse of the fact
that there's more
happiness experiencing
a sound deeper and
deeper and deeper level,
the mind just goes with it.
It's absorbed in it.
It just is attracted.
It gets drawn to
the transcendent,
which is absolute joy.
So that tendency of life
to want more happiness
can be used as the
mechanics of transcending.
And that is the classic trick.
It's a thousands-year-old trick
to take our normally outwardly
directed attention, deeply,
naturally, spontaneously
within, to experience greater
and greater and greater
happiness, and ultimately
the ultimate happiness.
So a little bit of
training involved.
What sound has that
quality for you?
And then how do
you use that sound
in a proper and
effortless, natural way,
which won't prevent
the transcending
from naturally occurring?
So that's all meditation is.
It's two things.
It's a proper sound and the
technique to use it properly.
And it's very easy to
learn, but to teach it
takes a little bit of training.
Like you'd get a master's
degree in teaching transcending.
And there are
thousands of teachers
who have that training.
And that takes a little time.
But learning is simple.
And again, it
works for children,
and it works for elderly
people who are in nursing homes
and care facilities to increase
their alertness, intelligence,
happiness, creativity,
memory, health.
So for people of
all ages, there's
nothing I think as
fundamental or as important
as transcending.
Well, it becomes,
then, not the ratio,
but how active we are, then,
in life, how efficient we are
and how we put the
actions and the things
that we have in our brain, you
know, how we manifest, too.
I mean, how does that
concretely show up in life?
The effects of transcending
show up everywhere.
Transcending is a
holistic experience.
The whole brain is
engaged and nourished.
And that means the
parts of our brain
that are involved with
nurturing children,
the parts of the brain that are
involved with deductive logic,
the parts of the brain
that are involved
with perception, speech,
action, athletics-- everything.
So transcending
is the one thing,
I'd say the only thing,
that is completely holistic,
engages and develops
the total brain,
and develops life holistically.
So if one was to be a better
mother, better doctor, better
athlete, better business
person, better artist,
this is the one thing that
will really unfold life fully.
When you explain that
to your colleagues
that you studied with at
Harvard and Stanford and all
those universities and are
probably also brilliant minds
but that see you talking about
TM, Transcendental Meditation,
that is, and how do they react?
And do they maybe
think, oh, he lost it,
and we don't understand why, but
he still has this great mind?
And how does this
all--? [LAUGHS]
You know, everybody
is so different.
People are so
different, you know?
And when you talk about
a physical scientist
or an engineer, these folks
are not always the folks
that are interested
in consciousness
or pay any attention to it.
They will say, well,
as long as Hagelin
is publishing good papers,
then, you know, that's fine.
If he wants to talk
about consciousness,
well, you know, that's fine.
That's his business.
So not everybody
understands it, of course.
And in fact, I'd
have to say, you
know, to really understand it
takes some degree of experience
with it.
When you talk about group
meditation, for example,
reducing crime, preventing
war, reducing social stress
and promoting social harmony,
that's hard for many people.
It's hard for a physical
scientist to understand.
I think for many physical
scientists, consciousness
either doesn't exist, or it's
some superficial byproduct
of the electrochemical
processes of the brain,
something superficial.
What we're talking about
here is consciousness
as fundamental, consciousness
as the unified field.
Now, physicists who are really
active in the field, they
accept the unified field,
the fundamental unity,
the basis of the surface
diversity of the world.
If you ask them, is
that fundamental unity
of life consciousness?
they'd say, what?
I don't think so, but,
honestly, I've never
thought about consciousness.
Those few physicists who do
think about consciousness,
including some at the
conference in Doorn here,
like Menas Kafatos,
they understand
that the unified field
is consciousness.
But honestly, most physicists
don't think about it.
It's not their business.
They're not into the
business of consciousness.
Leave that to the psychiatrists
and psychologists.
They're into the
business of physics,
and they don't yet
see the unity of the
objective and subjective world.
So there's a
relatively few people
in the world who are experts
in unified field theory.
There are relatively few experts
in the world who are experts
in consciousness and
unfortunately, very few people
in the world who are really
experts in both and that
are capable of creating
the connections
between deep consciousness
and deep physics.
And it's a fun,
fascinating, wonderful world
in which to play.
But there are very few
people to play with.
Mhm, mhm.
Well, we can definitely
feel through this interview
that you have those both sides.
And would you attribute
that to the meditation,
that it has developed
each of the side together?
And are those now linked?
That's interesting.
Well, it is
certainly true for me
that my meditation
has really enhanced
my ability to do physics.
I started to meditate at
the same time I was starting
to learn quantum mechanics, and
I was finding quantum mechanics
very abstract and really
very difficult and dry,
dry meaning kind of boring.
But, you know, after
meditation, it's like, wow,
these ideas are just
lucid and exciting
and profound and wonderful.
So it really
awakened my interest
and ability to do physics.
And other meditating
scientists will
say exactly the same thing.
So I think for me, meditation
was very important to develop
as a physicist.
One of my award-winning series,
the so-called Supersymmetric
Flipped SU(5) Grand
Unified Field Theory,
was completely
derived in meditation.
So it's been an
important tool for me.
But I don't know.
I've always believed
that truth is one
and that if physics brings
truth, which it does--
it's reliable; it's
testable; it's true--
and if the deep spiritual,
even religious, traditions
of the world bring truth, and
they do, or they wouldn't have
survived for millennia as a
useful, true guide to life,
then those two truths
must be linked.
Because there ultimately
is only one truth.
And where those two
truths come together,
the truth of the subjective
world and the truth
of the objective world
of modern science,
is at the level of
the unified field.
And that is where
pure consciousness
and pure existence,
the source of thought
and the source of the
objective world, come together.
There's an old saying,
atman is Brahman.
Brahman is the
fundamental unity of life.
Atman is our
consciousness, the self.
That self, pure consciousness,
the meditative state, samadhi,
is Brahman, is the experience
of the universal truth of unity.
Thank you.
Thank you, John, so
much for this moment
and for this interview.
And I look forward to
seeing you and hearing
you speak at the
conference here in Holland.
Thank you very much.
It's a great pleasure,
Lilou, and really
great pleasure to speak to
your wonderful audience.
Thank you.
Thank you, beautiful
Gaiam TV co-creators.
Much love from Holland.
Bye-bye.